okay good morning everybody sorry about
the technical issues this morning off we
go I have a sick family member at home
so masking on can everyone still hear me
in the back okay yeah okay all right so
as promised Tuesday morning just a
little bit of a refresher of where we
are and where we're going with the
assignments uh undergraduates you're
working your way through uh empty
simulation objects which are known as
links in the pi bullet simulator that
we're using and you're moving on today
in assignment three to joints like your
elbow joint or your knee joint the
things that connect objects or links
together so far you've had a relatively
easy go of it because everything you've
been coding up in the assignments has a
visual counterpart so when you install
pyro Sim when you installed pybullet and
Pyro Sim at the beginning of the
assignments and you got the simulator
working you'd see a window opening in
assignment two when you were creating
links and you added a link if you mixed
up length and width and height you would
see it immediately in the block itself
so everything you were coding up had a
visual counterpart from joints onward
everything you're going to be adding to
your uh code base is invisible it's not
going to have a visual counterpart in
the virtual world the things that you're
adding like joints in assignment three
they are going to affect the physics in
your virtual world but they're going to
affect things indirectly because you
won't see for example the joints
themselves so the first thing I want to
advise you about in assignment three is
to train yourself in being able to
diagnose what goes wrong in your
simulator as you start to add these
invisible elements you're going to be
adding joints in assignment three in
assignment four you're going to be
adding sensors then Motors then neurons
then synapses none of which have a
visual component so how do you know
whether you've implemented The Joint the
sensor the motor the neuron or the
synapse correctly you're going to have
to build up an intuition for when those
things are having the effect you want on
the virtual world and when they're not
so I want to take three minutes now and
just talk about how to do this for
joints as I mentioned joints like my
elbow joint are going to connect
together neighboring
links in your uh physical simulation
there are a number of properties that
you need to set for each individual
joint the first one is the position of
the joint itself where in
three-dimensional SP space is that joint
it's kind of intuitive the 3D position I
of that joint should be exactly where
the two links come together that's where
you want to connect those pieces
together if you get that 3D position
correctly and you start dragging pairs
of connected links you should see each
link rotating relative to the other one
at exactly the point where they touch
make sense okay if you get the position
wrong you put the joint up here and
luckily I cannot demonstrate this for
you with my upper and lower arm if the
joint position is up here the two links
are going to rotate about this position
so if you add a link to if you add a
joint to your simulation and when you
start to simulate it in the first time
step of the simulation the objects or
the links seem to be correct but then
they start to move away away from one
another in weird non-physical ways
that's the indirect signal to you that
you've got something wrong in terms of
joint position make
sense that's of course also what the TA
and I are looking for when we're grading
your
assignments if you submit your links
your joints assignment and we see pairs
of links coming apart will deduct a
point because we know you've got the
position of the joint wrong so far so
good okay couple other points about
links that are are particularly
confusing so I want you to pay attention
to this as you're implementing
assignment 3 there are a number of
features uh or settings for a given
joint like position which we just talked
about there's another feature of a joint
which is going to be set for you by
pyrro Sim you're not going to have to do
it yet but I want to just mention it now
because this could be a little bit
confusing now and later on when you're
setting the position of a joint you
obviously have to supply three numbers
because we're working in three
dimensions you're you're supplying the
three-dimensional position of the joint
for now pyrro Sim whenever you create a
joint is also going to send three
additional numbers to the physics engine
which is known as the joints normal so
let's go back to the example of my upper
arm and lower arm those additional three
numbers the joints normal are going to
represent a vector in three-dimensional
space that Vector is going to dictate
the plane the two-dimensional plane
through which the pair of connected
links
rotates make sense so if I've set my
elbow joint to be here telling the
physics engine that I want this object
to rotate relative to this object about
this
point if I Define this particular joint
normal pointing towards you there is one
and only one two-dimensional plane that
is normal to this 3D Vector everybody
remember high school algebra yeah okay
so I'm telling the physics engine that I
want these two parts to rotate in this
way if I do exactly the same thing I
connect these two links together with a
joint I give the exact same position of
the joint but now I Define this joint
normal how is my upper arm going to
rotate relative to my lower
arm exactly right there is one and only
one two-dimensional plane that is normal
to this 3D vertical Vector the 2D
plane at the moment pyrosim is going to
to set the normal for you it's going to
set it to well I can't you'll see it
when it's set up uh later on in the
course you can change the joint normal
so you can alter how the two objects
rotate relative to one another question
kind of unrelated to to the Joint stuff
is pet just like pretty slow like I
notic even just building like the the
cubes like on what like I bought my
laptop like last year it took like a
considerable amount of time okay good
question so is piie bullet slow if
you're running it on a laptop from last
year it absolutely should not be what
might be slow is the graphics right you
see it building these towers and then
once you've built the towers and you
start to grab an object and throw it
around assuming you have a relatively
recent laptop that should go quickly if
it's not something's probably wrong come
and see the TA or myself what we're
going to do later in this course when
you start wrapping your evolutionary
algorithm around the physics engine and
it's going to try out hundreds or
thousands of millions of robots in your
virtual world you're going to be running
many many many many many simulations on
your laptop at that point we're going to
turn off the graphics Once you turn off
the graphics the physics will go should
go very
fast okay
question
I okay so good point for on some
platforms maybe it's the IDE like fider
that's actually slowing things down
again for the upper years here and
especially for the grad students if you
haven't had a chance to work directly at
the command line or The Terminal before
here's a great opportunity to learn how
to do things strip away all NE
unnecessary Machinery like idees it's my
recommendation any other questions tips
or
tricks if things are running slow for
now it doesn't matter but it will matter
once we start doing some optimization
yeah okay third and final thing I want
to say about joints just as a heads up
for you to spend some time thinking
about in P question yep um I was
wondering if it's important that the
joints are always like originating from
the central body or if they can
originate from anywhere because they're
just in
uh a like a swivel like well not a
swivel like an
axle
okay I think there's a couple questions
embedded in that question one thing to
point out is there are different kinds
of joints that you can Implement in
pybullet it supports different kinds of
joints for the moment you're only going
to be working with rotational joints
things that cause pairs of connected
links to rotate relative to one another
you can also create uh linear
joints in P bullet which acts like a
piston it allows pairs of connected
links to move away from one another and
towards one another different kinds of
joints we're only going to work with
rotational joints at the moment your
second question is about where do the
joints originate and that's a good
question so I'm going to try and answer
that right now so we just talked about
two important features of joints the
position of the joint the joints
normal last thing to pay attention to uh
especially in assignment three is
relative and absolute
coordinates so up till now when you're
dealing with uh links you're using
absolute coordinates somewhere in your
virtual world there is the position 0 0
0 the world origin and when you identify
when you supply a 3D set a set of 3D
coordinates for where a link should be
or where a joint point should be you're
dealing with absolute coordinates it's
at this position in the absolute in in
the
world as you start to connect together
multiple pairs uh of links with joints
some of those joints you're going to
start using relative coordinates to
Define them so continuing to use my body
as an example here I've got my uh upper
body here and my upper body is connected
to my upper arm with a shoulder
joint my upper arm is collected
connected to my lower arm with my uh
with at my elbow joint the first joint
you're going to Define you're going to
use absolute coordinates but as you
continue down the body of the robot
you're going to switch from using
absolute to relative coordinates you're
going to give the position of this joint
relative to the position of uh one of
the links that's relative POS relative
as in the position is relative to
something else you've already added to
your simulation it's a little confusing
I tried to make a little Google uh slide
show there to help explain it take take
some time to make sure you really digest
and understand absolute and relative
coordinates you'll know if you've got it
wrong in the
simulation because the objects will
start to separate from one another so
hopefully it's relatively easy to
identify when things are wrong work back
make sure you have this all clear in
your
head is the object that's defined in the
joint definition the one that like the
the child object that's connected to the
parent joint is that the only one that
has um relative absolute coordinates or
is it every single link after the joints
definition yeah it's a great question I
don't remember off the top of my head it
should all be explained in assignment
three it's all
there
okay okay why would a physics Engine add
this Twist of complication why not
Define the positions of every link and
every joint in absolute coordinates
seems much simpler why mix and match
absolute and relative coordinates
anybody have an idea um just because if
you're building more complex structures
and like like it could be very hard to
say like I'm trying to make even like a
hand that's bent like this it could be
really hard to figure out where the like
those points are in absolute space
whereas you know if you know the angle
and like the width of this joint it's
pretty easy to Define it relative to a
previous one absolutely if you start
you're not going to yet in this class
but if you start to build very complex
robots made up of many many parts it
gets a little bit easier to define the
positions of things relative to what you
said parent Parts parent meaning up
towards the center of the body of the
robot child meaning down towards the
tips of fingers and toes and legs and so
on another reason why is that pie bullet
tries to make it relatively easy for you
to build a complex multi-link object
like a
robot and then make exactly the same
thing but a different position in the
virtual world if everything if the uh if
the parent node the thing at the top is
defined in absolute coordinates and you
make a new one you define those
different absolute coordinates but then
all the other coordinates in that second
robot because they're all relative
positions stay the same yeah makes it
easier to make a complex thing and then
clone it throughout the simulator that's
why pyrosim is going to put you through
this torture session of learning when
and where to use relative and absolute
coordinates for those of you that are
going to make robot swarms later in this
course it's worth the time and effort
and
pain all good okay I think that's all
I've got to say about links and joints
for today graduate students you're
running ahead to neurons and synapses
this
week Motors and neurons and synapses I
think okay back to our lecture material
okay apologies for speeding through
embodied cognition last time hopefully
this concept is relatively clear we're
going to see lots of examples of robots
as we continue through this course that
exploit the fact that they are embodied
in the world to pull out of the world
the information they learn they need to
learn about their relationship with the
world and survive and thrive in that
world we will also see robots that
exploit their situated nature the fact
that they are continuously bring uh
pulling in sensory information in real
time we are now going to move on to the
second theme of this course which is the
nuts and bolts of evolutionary robotics
or the tools of the trade we just spent
a few minutes talking about some of the
intricacies of physical simulation we'll
come back to that uh probably next week
okay today however we're going to talk
we're going to start by talking about
the brain that are going to make up your
robots which are artificial neural
networks
okay a pretty Hot Topic at the moment a
lot of what we're going to see today
forms the engine room of chat PT and
stable diffusion and all the other fancy
AI models that are out there for some of
you this is going to be very uh remedial
a lot of you will have seen this before
but some of you are not going to have
seen some of this material before so
please bear with me today okay we're
going to start as is appropriate for
this course we're going to start with
robots which robots are these we've seen
these
already these are the brenberg vehicles
right so we've got two sensors on the
front of the robot in this case photo
sensors two motorized Wheels on the back
and as we saw last week we can connect
the two sensors to the two Motors in
different ways we can connect them
ipsilaterally same side sensor to same
side motor or
contralaterally this sensor to this
motor we could connect this sensor to
this motor and this sensor to this motor
there's different ways we could wire up
the sensors to the motors okay
let's a terrible thing to do in a
robotics class we're going to take the
body and throw the body away for a
moment and keep the the brain we talked
about cartisian dualism last time a few
weeks
ago bear with me this is a little bit
cartisian but it'll help us understand
neural networks so with a brenberg
vehicle fresh in your mind imagine this
non-embodied
brenberg vehicle the only thing we've
kept are the two sensors and the two
Motors back here we're going to start to
introduce some terminology
here we're going to assume that these
two circles in the top are actually
sensor
neurons so this is a simulation of a
neuron sensor neurons the only thing
they're going to do is collect numbers
from the sensors so we've got the
sensors themselves the sensors are
connected to sensor neurons and as we're
going to see throughout this morning's
lecture neurons hold a value inside side
themselves they're called neurons um
they're a very gross approximation of
how actual biological neurons work we're
going to strip away most of the details
about biological neurons and we're only
going to add back those biological
details as we need them for squeezing
useful Behavior out of our robots for
now the only thing neurons are are are
buckets they're collecting numbers from
the sensors we're going to assume that
neurons are connected together with
synapses so all the arrows you see are
going to be things that connect pairs of
neurons together here's a synapse
represented by an arrow each synapse has
a pre synaptic
neuron and a
post synaptic neuron as the name implies
if we're talking about any given synapse
the pre synaptic neuron is the one at
the base of the synapse the post
synaptic neuron is the neuron at the
head of the synapse we're going to
assume these synapses are very very
simple the only thing these synapses are
going to do is take the value from their
pre synaptic neuron and pass it on to
their post synaptic neuron pretty simple
so far biological synapses again are
horrendously complicated structures for
now we're going to focus on the basic
thing they do which is act as wires or
transmission wires they pass along
signals from pre to post synaptic
neurons so far so good nothing too crazy
here yet okay all right so we've got our
two sensor neurons up here we've got two
neuron neurons down here at the output
layer we're going to treat these two
sensors as motor
neurons like the sensor neurons the only
thing the motor neurons are going to do
is to take their value and send it to
the
motor the motor which is not drawn here
the motor is the thing that's going to
control the wheel the only thing that a
motor does is to interpret this number
as a
command if a motor is spinning a wheel
the motor might interpret this number as
a desired velocity how fast F should the
motor try and get the wheel to turn so
motor neurons send commands to Motors so
far so good okay from the robot's point
of view the sensors capture information
from out in the world pass those values
onto their sensor neurons these synapses
flow or propagate those values from
their pre to their post synaptic neurons
the values arriving at the motor neurons
are sent to the motors the motors apply
torque torque is rotational Force how
much to torque or twist the wheel and
the wheel
spins sense think act you'll hear this
over and over again when we talk about
robotics okay pretty simple so far let's
start to add in some neural complexity
to our uh our disembodied robot here
we're going to change the neural
architecture we mentioned this term a
few weeks ago neural architecture it
describes the number of neurons how
they're arranged which neurons are
connected by synapses so we're making a
change to the neural architecture of
this neural network by adding two
additional synapses and we're going to
add a little bit of complexity to how
our motor neurons behave from this
simple cartoon you should be able to
guess what is the added complexity we're
adding to our motor neurons what do they
do now that they weren't they didn't
have to do
before add that's it right so this
particular neuron has two arriving
synapses at every point in time this
motor neuron is collecting the values or
is collecting the values that are
incoming from all of its incoming
synapses we've added in one of the very
important features of biological neurons
biological neurons collect information
from other neurons that are sending
values to them along the incoming
synapsis the only thing these motor
neurons are doing is summing these
values if we were to take this
particular neural architecture and put
it back in the brenberg vehicle what
kind of behavior would this neural
network cause the vehicle to
exhibit drive straight why would it
always drive
straight absolutely we've got some
inbuilt symmetry here right the left
hand motor neuron is always doing
exactly the same thing as the right hand
motor neuron they're both doing exactly
the same thing which means they always
get exactly the same values which means
they're always applying the same amount
of torque to the wheels which means the
vehicle
always um also say would go
faster closer like the angle those
towards like the the light source ah
okay so it's always going to go straight
so you're answering my next question
anticipating my next question which is
tell me about the velocity of the robot
we know about its direction its
direction never changes it always goes
straight what about
velocity the velocity would decrease
because the light isn't headon if the
well we're assuming that this is from
this example
like um but since the numbers are not
the same on each side that means that
it's hitting it from an angle so that
means that at some point it would pass
that angle okay and what happens let's
let's do this example we've got the
flashlight front left of the robot we
know that the robot always grows
straight so it's going to obliquely
approach the light the light is going to
generally get closer to the body of the
robot and then pass by what happens um
as it gets closer the go
up absolutely so if the light is front
left of the robot and the robot moves
forward now the light is a little bit
closer there is still a difference in
the two input values the two values at
the sensor neurons but their sum is
greater there's just more light falling
on both sensors so the robot speeds up
go goes past the light and the light
starts to fade behind the robot what
does the robot do as the light starts to
fade into the background behind
it it slows down okay so the purpose of
our little back and forth here is just
to remind you that the choices we make
about the neural network inside the
robot changes to the neural architecture
like we just saw influences how the
robot behaves in its environment
that's the whole game we're going to
play in this course if we want the robot
to do something useful what is the right
neural network controller that will
cause the robot to do that so far so
good Okay so we've got neurons now that
are summing their
inputs let's assume this hypothetical
example uh over here we're going to now
fold in yet another biological detail
which is we're going to start to assign
floating Point numbers to the
synapses and these floating Point
numbers are known as weights why are
they called weights the larger the
number is sorry the greater the
magnitude of the number the more
negative or the more positive that
number is the greater the weight of
influence that synapse has on its post
synaptic
neuron this is again a biological detail
of synapses some synapses pass along the
signal from their pre to their post
synaptic neuron but they weaken the
signal as they pass it along they have a
decree they decrease the weight of
influence of their press synaptic neuron
on their post synaptic neuron this
biological detail is incorporated into
artificial neural networks by assigning
these numbers and then every time we're
calculating the value at a post synaptic
neuron
we take that neuron we look at all of
the incoming
synapses we take for each synapse we
take the value of its pre synaptic
neuron we multiply it by the weight of
that synapse add it to the value of this
post synaptic neuron go to the next
incoming synapse for this particular
neuron multiply that synapses pre
synaptic neurons value by that synapses
weight and add it to this growing sum at
the post synaptic neuron yeah so how did
we get 1.29 here 0.6 * 0.8 plus 0.9 *
0.9 so far so good okay this is the
magic formula the main thing that
underlies all chaty pts stable
diffusions everything is built on top of
this basic idea in chat GPT in stable
diffusion you have a gazillion of these
neurons wired up in horrendously
intricate intricate ways what do each of
those little neurons inside Chachi PT
do this times this plus this times this
that's it well that not not just it but
most of what these neurons do so far so
good okay all right so uh that's
synaptic weights
let's add in one additional detail known
as activation functions and this name
comes again from biological neurons
which we'll get to in a moment let's
back up a moment in this hypothetical
example we can see that the two motor
neurons receive these two values imagine
that the leftand motor over here says
excuse me I have a problem you're
telling me to rotate you're telling me
to apply rotational force or Torque to
the wheel at
1.29 whatever the units are for torque
doesn't matter for our purposes I'm a
relatively weak motor I can only apply
torque up to 1.0 nothing above you're
asking me to do the impossible I can't
torque the wheel that
strongly a lot of neurons what we're
going to try and do is Cap the raw sum
that we're calculating inside that
neuron we're going to try and cap it
within a reasonable range what do we
mean by a reasonable range in our case
where the neural networks are going to
control the motors that make up our
robot we're going to try and cap that
range to the values that those Motors
can apply not not too not above not
below so far so good so we're going to
again add a little bit of detail or
complication to how we simulate these
neurons after each neuron computes its
raw weighted sum we're going to pass
that raw sum which in this case is
1.29 for this neuron we're going to pass
it through an activation number which is
going to take those raw values whatever
those raw values are and ensure that it
squashes them within a reasonable
range in uh artificial neural networks
there are a lot of different kinds of
activation functions that are used the
simplest is the identity function which
doesn't do any squashing at all you just
take the raw value and supply and return
it as the output of that neuron that's
not going to work for our purposes
because our Motors can't do everything
we ask them to do we might use the step
function where if you think of the
horizontal axis here the X representing
the raw sum if that raw sum is greater
than zero X is greater than zero return
from that neuron a value of
1.0 if the raw sum arriving at that
neuron is less than zero X is less than
zero return a value of minus one for
example if we were to take this step
function and use this step function as
the activation function for these
neurons and then we took this neural
network and put it back inside the
brenberg vehicle how does this step
function affect the way the vehicle
moves uh that's part of the answer
y it would either be moving as fast as
it can right so the neurons are either
rece the the neurons are either spitting
out plus one which means rotate the
wheels as fast as possible forward or
the motor neurons are outputting a minus
one reverse as fast as possible if you
dropped this neural network with step
activation functions into a brenberg
vehicle you'd see if through this then
this then this then this then this it
would always either be racing forward or
racing backwards we've again made a
change to the neural network controller
of the robot and we can see there's a
change to the robot's
Behavior would it going backwards
require that the sensors have like a
negative light value okay great po
question in order for it to go backwards
meaning that the motor neurons are going
to have to receive or be able to receive
a negative
number don't the sensors have to
register negative
values before we answer that question
remember that in our cartoon example
here these two sensor neurons are
receiving values from two photo sensors
which are registering the amount of
light in the
environment can light sensors register
negative
values there's no such thing right so
the the sensor sensor neurons are only
ever going to receive positive values or
maybe zero if it's pitch black how do we
get negative numbers at the output layer
Nega negative weights you'll notice that
one of these four synaptic weights has
has a negative value associated with it
thank you for asking that question that
was one additional biological detail
that I was about to miss yeah what does
it mean for a synapse to have a negative
weight be inhibitory it's inhibitory so
synapses can be either
inhibitory or
excitatory so inhibitory neuron is an in
inhibitory
synapse is simulated by giving that
synapse a negative
weight you can see how an inhibitory
synapse works by looking at this
particular synapse here remember that
we're always going to multiply this
synapses pre synaptic neurons value by
its
weight if this value is very low meaning
this sensor is ready registering low
light values we've got a value near zero
being multiplied by a negative number
which means we are subtracting a small
amount from this growing sum everybody
see
that as the vehicle keeps moving towards
for example a light source this value is
going to start to increase in
magnitude what starts to happen in how
this synapse influences is its post
synaptic
neuron this value is increasing in
magnitude the weight doesn't change it
stays minus
.3 what's
happening the output the output is going
to go down the higher magnitude
multiplied by this negative number means
we are subtracting more from this output
neuron the inhibitory synapse is
inhibiting its post synaptic neuron by a
greater amount
yeah gosh forbid this happens to any of
you over the next hour you start to
realize you might need to visit the
men's or ladies rooms after this lecture
finishes as this lecture continues that
need grows greater assuming you want to
stay and listen to the rest of the
lecture you're going your brain is going
to have to increasingly inhibit your
motivation to go visit the men's or
ladies room yeah this happens all the
time lots of interesting Neuroscience
even at this point in our discussion it
seems like uh Neuroscience is
discovering that most of the connections
in our brain are
inhibitory the pre the stronger the pre
synaptic neurons value is the more that
inhibitory synapse inhibits the firing
or the activity of its post synaptic
neuron
excitatory that's all the positive
weights the stronger the magnitude of
the pratic neuron the more it adds to
this growing sum rather than subtracts
from it so far so good okay lots of
different kinds of activation functions
we can choose the in the early days of
the deep learning Evolution there were
papers being published about new kinds
of activation functions were uh claiming
this is the best activation function you
put this in your early chat GPT and
it'll do way better you can imagine what
happened a few months later somebody
else published a paper saying no no no
no no this activation is the best one
okay this is not a class in artificial
neural networks we're not going to
discuss the pros and cons of different
activation functions the assignments
will instruct you to drop in a
particular kind of activation function
and off we go so far so good okay let's
push on okay what do neural networks do
in this class the neural network is
going to control the robot how does the
neural network control the robot by
acting as a function a neural network is
really just a mathematical object that
represents a function that
transforms
its inputs into a value or values
arriving at that Network or functions
output yeah okay so let's have a look
about at how neural networks actually
act as a function we're going to
simplify things greatly here we're going
to assume we have just two input neurons
I'm going to use input neurons
synonymously with sensor neurons in this
class when I say input neurons that's
kind of a hint that we're going to just
focus on non-embodied stuff for a little
bit we're going to ignore the body of
the robot when I say output neurons same
thing output neurons are synonymous with
motor neurons when I say output we're
assuming we're not really thinking about
the robot in which the neural network is
placed okay as you can see the
particular neural architecture for this
simple neural network it's got two input
neurons one output neuron two synapses
we're going to further simplify things
where we are going to apply values we're
going to plug values into the two input
neurons and we're going to see what
values we get at the
output we're going to use uh we're going
to use a step activation function at the
single output neuron if the raw sum that
arise that arrives down here is less
than some threshold we we're going to
set in a moment what that threshold is
if that raw weighted sum is below this
threshold we're going to set the output
neuron to zero if the raw weighted sum
arriving at that neuron is above that
threshold we're going to set the value
of that output neuron to one so the
input neurons and the output neurons are
only going to be able to encode binary
values we've got two binary input
neurons which means there's four
possible cases we can plug zero in here
and zero in here and see what we get at
the output we can plug zero in here one
in here we can see what we get at the
output and so on what I want you to do
now is to write down in these boxes or
on a on a sheet of
paper two synaptic weights I want you to
come up with weights for these two
synapses and I want you to come up with
a third number which is the threshold
for the output neuron so that if you
label these two synapses with your your
two chosen weights and you embed this
threshold in the output neurons
activation function I want you to do it
such that this neural network embodies
this particular Boolean function what is
this Boolean function and and yeah so
we're creating a neural network that
embodies a particular function the and
function what are those two weights and
what should that activation threshold
be
there is no one right answer there are
many triplets two weights and one
activation threshold that'll do the
trick five and five
okay
for okay can you tell us why you picked
those three
numbers it's just two equal numbers and
then some of those numbers to say okay
if I don't have both of these numbers I
won't be the sum or I'll be less than
the sum rather so that way you can say
if I have that sum then both are
absolutely great summary right so the
trick to the and function is having one
active unit is insufficient right it's
only when both input neurons are set to
one that you want the output neuron to
be one so if we take for Simplicity sake
0. five and we plug those two values in
here and we plug in 0 0 at the input
layer 0 * .5 is 0 plus 0 * .5 is 0 0 + 0
is 0 0 is below one the activ ation
function so uh zero the raw sum is below
one the activation thresold so the
output neuron will
output zero so far so good if we plug in
0 1 0 1 0 * .5 is 0 0 + 1 * .5 is 0.
five 0 + 0.5 is 0.5 0.5 our raw weighted
sum is still below the activation
function threshold of one so the output
neuron still outputs
zero it's only when we plug in 1 one 1
time5 plus 1 * .5 is
1 oh I've got a mistake here we've got
minus uh less less than or equal to we
now have the raw sum of one which is
less than than or equal to one which
means the output is being set to zero in
this
case not quite right we need to make one
slight change here to fix
things
like in the interest of time I won't go
back and do the original two cases let's
do this case again 1 * .5 + 1 * .5 is 1
which is greater than .95 thank you now
that the raw sum is the raw sum of one
is greater than 0.95 the output neuron
outputs a one these three set of values
assigned to this neural architecture
cause this neural network to embody the
and
function so far so
good
okay that's and
uh you'll see my solution here pretty
close to our
solution what about the or
function let's play the same
game what two synaptic weights plus an
activation function applied to this same
neural architecture will now cause this
neural network to embody the or
function and then be
tell me about your intuition how did you
come up with these
numbers get one
get absolutely so the values of the
synaptic weights before were 0. five
Your solution is to increase the two
weights of influence from .5 to one
which means now either of these cases if
we plug in 0 1 0 1 0 * 1 is 0 + 1 * 1 is
1 0 + 1 is one that one is already above
our threshold we now have a neural
network that embodies the or function
for some of you this might seem silly
and overly simplistic if you've never
done this before with pen and paper I
highly suggest you do so for those of
you lucky enough to go on and work in
the AI industry
and you build the next generation of
fantastically complex and capable
artificial neural networks it behooves
you to be able to in the absence of
everything else sit down and manually
simulate a neural network from the
ground up you know compared to tinkering
with the fantastically complex machine
but not really having a good intuition
for how that machine works at its most
basic level this is neural network
operating in its most basic way yeah
okay how about this one exclusive ore we
want to now again come up with two
synaptic weights plus an activation
threshold so that this neuron this
neural network will output a one only if
only one of its inputs is
on
you do one negative one for the
weights one negative one for the weights
and we need a threshold you use the same
threshold okay do these two synaptic
weights plus that activation threshold
does it do the
trick nope other ideas a threshold of
zero a threshold of
zero does that do it
in the interest of time I won't go
through all the four cases hopefully you
can do some of these in your head
now no I wouldn't do it because if you
were if you were adding both and you
would have um you have it being
like
if you were adding the negative one then
it wouldn't be giving like a positive
one value it's not going to work but
okay other
ideas could you just have weights of one
one and then have the threshold be
anything greater than one anything
greater than one or two or 1.5 sorry no
just one one of so like if it's one one
then the output is two which so
so
oh wait that doesn't work
either anyone figured out what the game
beneath the game is
here ah it's not going to do it there is
no set of three real values that will
cause this neural network to embody the
exclusive or function okay let's pause
for a moment this realization was made
in the about around the mid 80s when
neural networks were first starting to
gain some traction there was a AI High
summer or at least an AI spring that was
in full bloom at that time most people
were convinced or a lot of people were
convinced holy cow these things called
artificial neural networks this is it
we're finally going to make intelligent
machines these really smart guys back in
1956 told us that it would just take one
summer they were wrong it took longer
than we expected but now mid 80s this is
it here we go look we can make a neural
network that embodies or we can make a
neural network that embodies and this is
it AGI is a breath away if we can do and
Andor we're almost
there somebody came along Marvin Minsky
who we actually talked about in the
history of AI came along and said wait a
second there are actually some
relatively simple functions that neural
networks cannot solve and that punctured
that ended up puncturing all of the
excitement in AI within the AI Community
more importantly within the funding
agencies that were giving money to drive
this research and that drove artificial
neural networks into a very deep winter
starting in the mid to late
1980s in the 90s if you mentioned
artificial neural networks in a Grant
application good luck to you some crazy
person came along in the early 2000s
didn't call them artificial neural
networks called them deep Learners they
rebranded what these things are called
and showed that you could actually could
create a now deep learner that solves
the exclusive or function somebody
mentioned adding one detail which is
maybe add a third case to the activation
function turns out there are different
ways you can add some complication to
make these deep learners embody
exclusive ore that wasn't the twist they
added what was the twist they added in
the early 2000s which triggered the
current High summer that we're in does
anybody
know add another
layer they made the networks
deeper if you think about each of these
rows of neurons and we're going to start
to see neural network arranged in rows
of
neurons you could add layers in between
this is commonly known as the input
layer this is commonly known as the
output layer and the layer or layers
sandwiched in between are known as the
hidden
layers as long as those hidden layers
also had certain kind of activation
function
and for our purposes we'll just we're
just going to sck with the step function
you can get a now deep learner to embody
exclusive
ore
how as you can see here I've added uh a
hidden layer we've got two hidden
neurons so-called hidden neurons because
they're hidden from direct influence by
the outside world these neurons don't
directly receive values from out here
whatever is Upstream of the input layer
and they also do not directly influence
whatever is outside here Downstream of
the output neurons all the hidden
neurons do is influence or modulate the
way that the layer before influences the
layer of neurons after so far so good
okay I've I've solved half the problem
for you I've added two hidden neurons
I've wired up the two input neurons to
the two hidden neurons with four
synapses and then we're going to take
our two hidden neurons wire them up with
synapses to the one output neuron and
now in order to get this thing to embody
exclusive ore we have to come up with
one 2 3 4 five six synaptic weights and
1 2 3 three threshold activation
thresholds for our two hidden neurons
and our one output
neuron this is a pretty difficult
problem to solve if you just attack it
head on I want you to pay attention to
the strong hint that I'm giving you the
two hidden neurons you're going to use
them to compute partial
results and then those two partial
results encoded in the two hidden
neurons I want you to come up with two
syn weights and an activation threshold
that combine those partial results in
just the right way to solve exclusive
or before you start trying to come up
with synaptic weights what do you think
the two sub result two uh partial
results should be what are the two
subfunctions that make sense to compute
and then combine them to solve exclusive
or is it and an or and and or are the
two subfunctions we want to create why
is Computing and and or first and then
combining them in some way why is that a
good way to solve exclusive
or exclusive or
is or and not and or and not and yeah if
we just look at the what we want the
exclusive or's outputs to be I'm going
to flick back and forth between
exclusive or and and here's and
here's exclusive or now I'm going to
flip back and forth between exclusive or
and
or in three out of the four cases we
want exclusive ore to act like or and
only in the fourth case do we want to
suppress or
inhibit the or
function okay so what do we need up here
if we want this thing to embody and and
this thing to embody
or0 five and 0 five and a threshold
of 95 which will give us which one
that'll give us and so if we apply that
to the left hand hidden neuron the left
hand hidden neuron will embody the N
function we want the right hand hidden
neuron to embody the or function so
it's
one
okay what do we label the last two
synapses with and what activation thre
threshold do we set so for this do we
want to inhibit and well keeping or
strong is that like
so yeah negative there
and a positive there why do we want to
inhibit the and
gate if if and is
[Music]
true we want it to not act like the or
gate going back and forth between
exclusive or and or in only the case
where one and one comes in one one will
light up the and hidden neuron that
neuron when it lights up it should
inhibit the output
neuron everybody see that apologies in
my cartoon example here I've got and on
the right hand side and or on the left
hand side it doesn't matter the
intuition here is we want the neural
network to compute and an or as long as
it's not one one let this thing flow
down to the output neuron this thing
should act like an orgate in three out
of the four cases in just that case
where one one happens that one one
should override this part and inhibit it
so it outputs a
zero the activation threshold of the
final neuron that just has to be any
positive number like
uh does it
just not any positive number or any like
value between zero and one any value
between zero and
one there's lots of different ways you
could do this and again I encourage you
if you got a free few free moments this
week sit down with pen and paper and
come up with different ways of doing
this yeah okay that's a lot of
explanation just to really drive home
this this fact that choice of neural
architecture the number of neurons and
synapses and how they're wired up plus
the labeling of that Network which
synapses we set to excitatory and
inhibitory and activation functions can
alter this
transformation for our purposes as we
leave this slide what we've done by
introducing neurons is allow for
nonlinear
Transformations for our purposes that
just means that there are certain simple
transformations that a shallow learner
cannot do there are more complex or
nonlinear Transformations for which you
need a deep learner you need something
with one or more than one hidden
layer
okay again this is not a class in
artificial neural network so I'm racing
through a lot of these details what
happens if the what happens if the
neural network makes a mistake we were
able just barely to to think up with our
Collective brains what all the weights
and activation thresholds should be
Beyond exclusive ore it gets near
impossible to actually write down the
correct weights and activation functions
for a neural network so why don't we
create a computer program that figures
out what those weights and activation
functions should be there were many
algorithms that were proposed to do this
the winning algorithm that came back
with a vengeance in the the early 2000s
was the back propagation of air
algorithm I just told you that the nuts
and bolts of neurons and synapses and
weights and activation thresholds is
sort of the bread and butter of the deep
learning Revolution it's really the
bread the butter is the other thing the
algorithm that is able to figure out
what all these labelings should be so
deep deep Learners plus the back
propagation of air algorithm is is what
made chat GPT and stable diffusion
possible okay very briefly how does back
propagation of erir work let's imagine
we have this particular neural network
that has two output neurons output one
and output two we have a big uh truth t
or not a big truth table we've got four
possible cases and for whatever reason
when we Supply 0 one here we want the
output to be 1 Z doesn't matter which
Boolean function this is let's just
assume this is what we want to happen
when this
happens let's start by just setting all
the weights to one we don't know what
they should be let's just all make them
one if we assign one and we feed in 0
one at the input layer we do not get the
desired Result One Zero we get one one
output one did the right thing output
one did the wrong thing there's error at
output two there is no error at output
one what do we do next the name of this
algorithm gives it away
hopefully we're going to propagate
backwards through the network we just
propagated from input to Output now
we're going to back propagate from
output up to input and we're going to
flow this air backwards and Trace the
origins of this err why did this neuron
make a mistake and we're not going to go
into how this is actually done it
requires a little bit of calculus we're
not going to do that this morning
suffice it to say the back propagation
algorithm is able to determine how to
change not the value of the neuron it's
going to go keep going backwards it's
going to propagate backward and it's
going to make changes in this case to
the two incoming synapses these synapses
these two synapses are the only thing
that's influencing the behavior of this
erroneous neuron so that's where you
should go back propagation travels
backwards along both links and makes a
change to
them so that now the next time you
propagate
forward it does the right thing that's
the back
propagation of air
algorithm arguably the greatest
invention ever human any human ever
invented if someone were to ask for my
opinion I would say this is ultimately
going to be more valuable than the wheel
you can form your own opinion okay all
right one last thing I want to point out
that will probably come up in your final
project is a problem with the back
propagation of air algorithm which is
overfitting just as a cartoon example of
how this works you can see we've now
made a more complicated truth table down
here it's still a binary table but we've
got more rows and columns now we're
going to assume that this is a clinical
neural network it's going to be used in
the emergency room right across the quad
over here as patients arrive at the
emergency room and complain this
particular patient one complains of
symptom one not symptom 2 yes they
complain of symptom k a minute later
another patient walks through the ER
doors this particular patient is not
suffering from symptom one or symptom 2
but is suffering from symptom K the ER
continues to record all of this
information and whatever happens to that
patient after their visit to the
hospital did they have a particular were
they eventually diagnosed with a
particular disease or
not we're going to assume that with
enough symptoms or tests that there is
an under Ling relationship between all
of these input values and the output we
care about does the patient actually
have the disease or not imagine we
create a neural network with this kind
of architecture where we have K input
neurons for all the K possible symptoms
that the ER uh is recording and we have
one output neuron which is the neural
Network's prediction about whether this
particular patient with these symptoms
is actually suffering from the disease
or
not we're also going to assume that we
don't know what this relationship is but
maybe it's complicated and nonlinear so
let's add in some hidden neurons down
here and apply the back propagation of
air
algorithm okay unbeknownst to us what
does this neural network do during this
back propagation of air where we feed in
these different patient symptoms
propagate forward propagate backwards
tune the weights feed in the next
patient propagate forward propagate air
back tune the weights tune tune tune
tune tune tune tune tune tune over and
over again with hundreds and hundreds of
patient data we see that this neural
network actually gets better at
reproducing what the doctors put a lot
of effort into actually figuring out
which is whether or not the patient was
suffering from that disease or not looks
awesome our neural network is working we
take it we give it to the nurses at er
we tell the nurses don't bother don't
bother the doctors just when somebody
comes through the ER door ask them
figure out what symptoms they're
suffering from plug that into the neural
network and if the neural network
predicts they're not suffering from this
disease discharge them there's no need
to test them for the disease this neural
network knows whether or not these
symptoms uh are indicative of the the
disease or not you can probably guess
from this story where things are going
okay patient n plus one walks through
the door and has a particular
combination of symptoms that this neural
network never
saw this neural network predicts that
patient n+1 is not suffering from this
infectious disease so the nurse kicks
them out of the ER room of er
unbeknownst to the neural network and
the nurse and patient this patient
actually is suffering from that disease
the neural network made a mistake
happens all the time the most common
explanation for why it's making this
mistake is that the neural network has
overfit let's assume we trained this
neural network on N patients and just by
coincidence we happened to have n hidden
neurons inside that neural network
there's is an easy way for this neural
network to learn and predict all of
these n
outcomes use hidden neuron one to
memorize or recognize patient one you
can set all the incoming synapses to the
first hidden neuron so that this hidden
neuron will only light up when it sees
patient one and the rest of the time it
will stay silent this second hidden
neuron will learn through the back
propagation algorithm to light up only
when it sees Patient 2 and so on it's
memorizing all of the patients that are
available during
training what do the weights of these
synapses flowing from the hidden neurons
to the output neuron
do how do you need to if all the hidden
neurons are memorizing the patient
symptoms what do these synaptic weights
need to do to allow this neural network
to cheat to predict correctly whether or
not that patient is suffering from the
disease they need to establish weights
that like the people who have the
disease will always be signified as
true and if the patient is not suffering
from the disease we set the weight
to there will always be like some weight
that will set it to be false so for for
for this particular patient one they
were suffering from the disease so set
this synaptic weight to one one time one
if we set the activation threshold low
this output neuron will light up with a
one if patient two we who was not
suffering from the disease we feed in
all of the symptoms of patient two only
the second neuron lights up all the
others stay silent we take that Lit Up
second hidden neuron on and multiply it
by a inhibitory weight we get a negative
value down here which is very likely to
be below the threshold and this output
neuron predicts no that patient is not
suffering from the
disease I tell you that surprise
surprise we actually have a huge exam on
Thursday you haven't done any of the
reading you madly do all the reading you
try and contact students who've taken
this class in previous years you get the
surprise exams from previous years you
don't have time to do all the reading
and watch all the lectures you memorize
previous exams and hope hope hope that I
recycle
exams we all Panic from time to time and
cheat by memorizing rather than learning
patterns and data same thing with
artificial neural
networks okay we got one minute left how
are we doing with time we're not going
to finish this
today one additional detail I want to
put uh point out uh we're going to add
one uh one final detail to our neural
network architecture we're going to
introduce what are known as recurrent
connections or recurrent synapses you
might have noticed that in all the
cartoon neural networks we've looked at
so far they're all pointing more or less
downward they're pointing from the input
layer towards the output layer in some
way we can also add recurrent
connections where now for example if
we're trying to compute the value at
this first motor neuron we can see that
there are three incoming synapses to
this particular motor neuron so we're
going to take this value times this
weight plus this value times this weight
plus this value times this weight to
compute this raw sum if we know what
this value should have been so that
there's error at this
particular uh there's error oh sorry
let's forget Air for a
moment we've computed the raw value at
this point we've taken this sensor value
times this synapse this sensor value
times this synapse we need to collect
the value from motor two but we haven't
computed the value of motor 2 yet we're
just on motor one we're going to take
the Val what the value of motor 2 from
the previous time step if we if we'd
already updated this neural network once
we have a value for motor 2 from the
previous time step so we're combining at
this particular
neuron sensation in the current time
step what it's currently sensing and a
memory of what motor 2 did a short
moment ago so the last thing I want to
leave you with today is if we add
recurrent synapses to our neural network
we add memory to a neural network netw
work which we're going to see is useful
for certain robots that need to combine
current sensation with a memory of
things that have happened in the past to
know exactly what to do in the current
moment undergrads you're working on
assignment three grads you're working on
five and six you have a quiz due tonight
I'll see you all on Thursday thank you